Hello and welcome to the
wonderful world of open source.
What is open source and why is
it wonderful?
The short answer to this
question is that open source
means that the source of the
code is open to the public,
meaning that anyone can come and
play in our sandbox.
So projects and computer
languages that are open source
mean that anyone can build on
the work, change it to suit
their needs, or work with others
to make necessary changes they
might not be able to do by
themselves.
Open source software is also
free, which makes it a great
option for the public sector and
allows us to share our work
broadly to other users like
other state agencies, local
governmental units, and the
public.
This differs vastly from the
world of proprietary software,
where licensing fees, software
costs, or delayed updates or
deployments can make it
difficult to share your work
outside or even within your own
team.
The open source programming
language we're going to be
learning about in these sessions
is a language called RR is a
language that was originally
developed for statistical
analysis, data visualization,
and manipulation.
Since it started to gain
popularity, it's also grown in
functionality and can do more
than ever before.
The R community is ever growing
and now worldwide and that means
that the community is continuing
to build new tools, features and
applications for the language.
There's also an active community
at the state of Minnesota.
We have a cross agency team that
represents 7 different agencies
with over 150 members.
We meet weekly on our tidy
Tuesdays to talk about problems,
present fantastic solutions, and
share tips and tricks.
It started as a small group of
dedicated practitioners and it's
continues to grow.
We use R to do many different
things, mainly data related and
those include connecting to
databases, reading and data from
all kinds of formats including
CSV, excel, Jason and the
occasionally weird delimited
file like TSVS which is tab
separated values.
Who thought of that?
We use R to document our work
and share our methods with
others.
We can use R to create reports,
dashboards, and presentations
just like this one that are easy
to update and automate.
The major benefit to solving our
problems in R is that our work
becomes reproducible and
shareable, meaning others can
take our work and get the same
solutions just by running our R
scripts.
That's because an R script is
like a recipe for cookies.
It follows a top to bottom, step
by step process that others can
read and follow over and over
again.
Oh no, if this scenario looks
familiar to you, that's
something R can help us with as
well.
Using R we can write a procedure
to clean, corral and fancy up
data for a report and then
automate sending that data via
e-mail in one easy to update
procedure.
This can reduce time errors and
for you up to tackle those
really hard projects that no one
has had time to do.
Because we're so busy doing the
everyday tasks.
We've talked about a bunch of
things that make R awesome, but
there's lots of really cool
tools out there.
So what makes R stand out from
the crowd?
R versus Excel.
R can handle much larger data
sets, and I mean really large
data sets, and it won't take
forever either.
R is more flexible than Excel.
It can take many different data
types, including pulling data
directly from a database.
R analysis are more
reproducible.
It can be extremely hard to
figure out how someone did an
analysis in Excel, if not
impossible.
In R you're provided with a step
by step procedure for how
someone did the work.
Excel is more widely used, but
that doesn't mean it's always
the right tool for the job.
Think of the if all you have is
a hammer analogy, R versus
Tableau.
Tableau is primarily a data
visualization software.
Tableau does not have a strong
analysis component and might not
be able to do the kinds of
statistical analysis you might
need.
Our shiny is more flexible and
can do more on the flight
calculations and is very user
input driven.
Tableau's drag and drop
interface makes it faster and
easier for creating simple
visualizations, but is not
easily reproducible.
R is 100% text based so you can
track changes over time
#versioncontrol R versus SQL.
SQL is the language of
databases.
It's easy to learn if you know
you'll be working with databases
a lot, but you might not be and
then it's really not much use if
all you're dealing with is flat
files or exports.
SQL queries are sent to a
database server and processed
then before returning the data.
This can take a lot of time
depending on the size of the
query and there are more time
efficient ways to do this using
RR can run SQL queries to pull
data from databases and data
lakes.
R has a package called DB player
which converts R to a SQL query.
So what we're really saying is
that you don't even need to know
SQL if you know R which is
pretty cool.
R can read data from almost
anywhere.
Databases, flat files, web
pages.
Just reminding you that R is
pretty awesome.
R versus Python.
Honestly, this one might just
come down to some personal
preferences, but if you're here
taking our class, we're hoping
we can get you on Team R Python
is a general purpose programming
language popular for doing
Internet Things.
R is more specifically focused
on visualizations and
statistical analysis.
Compared to Python's pandas, R's
tidyverse is more intuitive and
easy to use.
Historically, Python has been
used with GIS software like Arc
GIS, but spatial analysis with R
has been growing.
Packages like SF and leaflet has
been doing some really excellent
things in this area.
R versus SAS.
R is open source while SAS
requires a license.
That means a cost savings and
also making analysis and data
more widely available.
Since it would no longer require
a paid software, anyone can
create and add updates to R
packages at any time.
New features for SAS only become
available when the SAS team
makes it so, and that wraps up
our welcome video.
You're officially part of the R
crew, so let's see what's next.